#Chapter 1 Why Linux? 

---

## Gain Some Perspective

Why should you care about Linux? To answer this question, you will need to gain
some perspective about the history of various operating systems, Linux
philosophy and its market impact. Once this perspective is gained you can begin
to comprehend how Linux benefits to you personally, how businesses and the world
are already benefiting from Linux and other free and open source projects.

## Order Up! - What is an operating system?

An operating system is much like a waitress or server at a restaurant. She is a
big part of your eating out experience. She will usually greet you and take your
order, she submits that order to kitchen and returns with your food. She assists
you with drinks, extra napkins or utensils or what ever else you need. Finally,
she makes sure you settle your bill appropriately and sends you on your way.

Although she does several things as part of her job, her primary focus is very
specific.  She is your interaction with the restaurant. She doesnt maintain the
building or cook the food, however she makes sure your experience with all the
things happening in a restaurant is pleasant. 

In much the same way an operating system allows a user to interact with a
computer and defines the experience. For instance, when you click on an icon to
start your web browser, the operating system recognizes the clicking of the
mouse, communicates with the processor, the RAM and other components of the
computer to open the application on your computer screen. The operating system
is not the web browser or other program you may be running, much like they
waitress is not your food, but she is the one that brings you your food. It is
what allows you to use the hardware on your computer. A computer without an
operating system is door stop. It may be able to power on but nothing useful to
the user can happen. It is fundamentally the most important feature of a
computer. It is what allows you to start programs, have a file system to
navigate through and store files, have menus, move the mouse, type on the
keyboard and in a very real sense interact with the computer.

Operating systems come in various favors depending on the experience that you
want. Many users prefer the Microsoft Windows experience while other may prefer
the Apple OSX or Linux experience. Which operating system works best for you?


## A brief history in operating systems?

In order to fully appreciate and understand the various operating systems
available, you will need to understand the history of how these operating
systems came about. By recounting the history of these software and computer
movements we can gain an understanding of their culture and approach to software
and how we derived with our current dynamics in technology.

### Microsoft

We will begin with the most well known and most commonly used operating system
Microsoft Windows and each of its various incarnations over the years. Microsoft
was founded by Bill Gates and Paul Allen in Albuquerque, New Mexico April 4,
1975. In its earliest beginnings Microsoft was not an operating system company.
      Its founders originally saw potential to implement the programming
language BASIC interpreter on a new computer at the time called the Micro
Instrumentation and Telemtry System or MITS. Bill Gates was attending Harvard
and dropped out to start Microsoft and Paul Allen worked at Honeywell. 

On January 1, 1979 Microsoft moved from Albuquerque to Belleview Washington in
an effort to recruit top quality programmers. "Steve Ballmer joined the company
on June 11, 1980 and would later succeed Bill Gates as CEO." [^1]

The success of Microsoft BASIC was followed by the Z-80 SoftCard in 1980, which
allowed the Apple II computer to run poplar business software and initiated
Microsofts first partnership with Apple. 

At this time Microsoft was only moderately successful. It wasnt until Microsoft
contracted with IBM did they dive into the operating system business and jump
from a humble start up to a more mature corporation. In 1981, IBM was in the
market for an operating system as for their new home and business computers and
Microsoft agreed to provide that operating system. However there was a problem.
Microsoft didnt have access to an operating system, so they bought one call
86-DOS from Tim Paterson for about $90,000, which they then sold to IBM for more
than four times that much.[^2]  As part of sales agreement with IBM, Microsoft
also kept the rights to DOS allowing them to also sell DOS to other computer
makers. IBM later regretted this decision.  

Microsofts next venture with Apple started in the early 1980s when Apple
acquired a graphical interface for an operating system from Xerox which allowed
a user to drag and drop item, resize and overlap windows and use menus to
navigate program options. Microsoft was contracted by Apple to help implement
this graphical interface on their Apple computers. A short time later Microsoft
released a vary similar graphical interface built on top of DOS called Windows
1.0 which was release to the public earlier months earlier than Apples, beating
  them to the market. As you can imagine Apple was not pleased. Steve Jobs
recounts,

> Their meeting was in Jobs’s conference room, where Gates found himself
surrounded by ten Apple employees who were eager to watch their boss assail him.
Jobs didn’t disappoint his troops. “You’re ripping us off!” he shouted. “I
trusted you, and now you’re stealing from us!” Gates just sat there coolly,
looking Steve in the eye, before hurling back, in his squeaky voice, what became
a classic zinger. “Well, Steve, I think there’s more than one way of looking at
it. I think it’s more like we both had this rich neighbor named Xerox and I
broke into his house to steal the TV set and found out that you had already
stolen it.”[^3]

In 1988, Apple sued Microsoft. Bill Gates is quoted by InfoWorld Newsweekly
during this time as saying: "We're saying that these graphic interface
techniques, the ideas, are not copyrightable." [^4] After a five year legal
battle the courts sided with Microsoft.

Microsoft later released Microsoft Windows version 3.0 in 1990 and version 3.11
in 1993. At this time Microsoft was still not the dominate operating system on
the desktop. Other operating systems such as AmigaOS[^5], BeOS[^6] and OS/2[^7]
from IBM as well as others were worthy contenders for the desktop market.

It wasnt until 1995, with the release of Windows 95 did Microsoft solidify their
dominance in the market. Windows 95 introduced the start menu button and was a
significant upgrade to DOS and Windows 3.11. Other features included a "taskbar
across the bottom of the screen, which contain[ed]"[^8] icons of all your
running programs and Internet Explorer 4 as the web browser. 

As Microsoft approached the new Millennium they released Windows 98, Windows
2000 which was specifically designed for business use and Windows Me designed
     for home use.  It was during this time Microsoft Windows ran over 90% of
the desktop computing market and Microsoft took advantage of this dominance. 

During this time, Internet Explorer was bundled with every copy of Windows,
which meant users didnt need to download the then leading web browser Netscape
Navigator. This was an intentional act on Microsoft to "cut off Netscape's air
supply" and gain dominance in the web browser market according to Steven
McGeady, vice president at Intel. Microsofts abuse of its monopolistic position
initiated the United States and 20 other states to file an antitrust case
against Microsoft in 1998.[^9] In 1999, "Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson
[decided]...  that Microsoft had taken action to crush threats to [its]
monopoly, including Apple, Java, Netscape, Lotus Notes, RealNetworks, Linux and
others." Microsoft appealed and settled with the department of Justice in 2001
with essentially a slap on the wrist.[^10] 

Other lawsuits followed with the European Commission regarding Microsofts abuse
of its dominant position with its Windows Media Player and from complaints by
Novell and Sun Microsystems of its Windows operating system. [^11]

In the early 2000s, Microsoft released Windows XP which became its most popular
and longest running operating system. Window Vista, Windows 7 and 8 followed and
on July 29, 2015 Windows 10 was released which featured a re-designed menu,
Cortana a voice activated interface and a re-designed web browser called
Microsoft Edge. 


[^1]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Microsoft

[^2]:http://forwardthinking.pcmag.com/software/286148-the-rise-of-dos-how-microsoft-got-the-ibm-pc-os-contract

[^3]:https://www.quora.com/How-did-Microsoft-not-get-sued-by-Apple-if-they-ripped-off-the-Macintosh-and-their-GUI

[^4]:http://electronics.howstuffworks.com/tech-myths/5-myths-about-bill-gates4.htm

[^5]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AmigaOS

[^6]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/BeOS

[^7]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/OS/2

[^8]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows_95

[^9]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Browser_wars

[^10]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/United_States_v._Microsoft_Corp.

[^11]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Microsoft_Corp_v_Commission

### Apple

It would be difficult to image a world without Apple and the impact of iTunes
and the iPhone in our modern culture. On April Fools day 1976, Steve Jobs and
Steve Wozniak founded Apple. The early computers of the mid-1970s where costly
and out of the price range for Wozniak. So when MOS Technology made available a
6502 CPU chip for $20 (roughly $83 today), Wozniak saw an opportunity to get his
     own computer. He designed and built a circuit board to work with the
6502 chip and wrote a version of the BASIC programming language for it. While
     showing off his new computer at a Homebrew Computer Club meeting, he met
Steve Jobs. 

Jobs saw the commercial potential of Wozniaks computer and quickly was able to
sell an order of 50 computers to a hobby store in the area.  With the help of
friend Ronald Wayne, he and Wozniak built circuit boards while Jobs secured
parts and found buyers. Eventually, 200 Apple I computers were built. 

Apple was still not a successful business and struggled securing funds to build
and distribute the Apple II which added significant improvements to its
predecessor. Steve Jobs came into contact with angel investor Mike Markkula who
was able to secure a $250,000 bank loan. The Apple II was a huge success and
solidified Apple as a tech company.

In May 1980, the Apple III computer was developed but was not successful due to
an issue with overheating and thousands of computers were recalled. 

With the failure of the Apple III, the company looked forward to its latest
venture the Macintosh 128k computer and the Lisa. It was around this time that
in exchange for stock options Apple was allowed to tour Xeroxs research and
development center (PARC). It was here that Jobs was introduced to the Xerox
Alto computer which featured a mouse-driven graphical interface.[^12]

> An engineer named Larry Tesler conducted the demonstration. He moved the
cursor across the screen with the aid of a "mouse." Directing a conventional
computer, in those days, meant typing in a command on the keyboard. Tesler just
clicked on one of the icons on the screen. He opened and closed "windows,"
deftly moving from one task to another. He wrote on an elegant word-processing
program, and exchanged e-mails with other people at PARC, on the worlds first
Ethernet network. Jobs got a "little bit" excited watching this presentation.
He could not believe that Xerox wasnt doing much with this technology:

> "Jobs was pacing around the room, acting up the whole time," Tesler recalled.
"He was very excited. Then, when he began seeing the things I could do onscreen,
he watched for about a minute and started jumping around the room, shouting,
'Why aren't you doing anything with this? This is the greatest thing. This is
revolutionary!'" Steve Jobs ...went back to Apple and demanded that his team,
which was working on the next generation of personal computer, change their
thinking.  He wanted menus, he wanted windows, he wanted a mouse![^13]

It was during this time Jobs recruited Microsoft to assist in developing its
graphical interface. The first popular Graphical User Interface (GUI) computer
the Apple MacIntosh was made available in 1984. The MacIntosh was a moderate
success however its impact is still felt. Modern desktops still have icons that
represent files and folders that can be click on and moved around. There are
menus and windows that can overlap and allow for multi-tasking. 

In 1985, with the embarrassment of the Apple III still looming in the shadows,
poor sales of the Lisa computer due to its exorbitant pricing and visionary
differences with the board of directors, Jobs was stripped of all his duties and
later resigned from his position as Chairman of the Board. It is interesting to
note that upon leaving Apple, Jobs continued to be successful, taking ownership
of the visual effects company Pixar and founding a new computer company called
NeXT Inc, which built computers running the Unix based operating system
NeXTstep.

By 1995, Apple was struggling and was looking for new operating system to
replace its aging system which was lagging behind its competitors. Apple decided
to purchase Steve Jobs company NeXT Inc, which not only brought the NeXTstep
operating system which is the foundation of Apples current OSX, it also brought
Jobs back in management who quickly became CEO.

After years of mismanagement Apple was financially limping along, so in an
effort to save the company, Jobs leaned on an unlikely former rival for
assistance. In 1997, Apple reconciled its long standing legal battle with
Microsoft in favor of receiving a $150 Million investment from the software
company and agreed to a five-year commitment to release Microsoft Office for
MacIntosh.  

Since that time Apple has been very successful with their iMAC, iBook and Power
Mac G4 computer heading into the year 2000. Mac OSX was introduced in 2001 and
replaced the aging MAC OS 9 operating system. Apple also announced and opened a
line of Apple retail stores during this time. [^12]

In the following years Apples released iTunes, the iPOD and finally the iPhone
which now accounts for the majority of Apples revenue. In 2011, Steve Jobs died
due to complications to pancreatic cancer. [^14] After his death, Tim Cook
replaced Steve Jobs as CEO of Apple.


[^12]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Apple_Inc.

[^13]:http://zurb.com/article/801/steve-jobs-and-xerox-the-truth-about-inno

[^14]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Steve_Jobs#Death

### Unix

Throughout the early history of computing, computers were large and filled
entire rooms and were only used by a handful of universities, businesses and the
military for mostly research purposes.  Each computer ran its own operating
system. Even between various IBM machine models the operating system,
programming, input method and function could be completely different. The
thought of taking a program that was written on one machine and have it run on a
different machine was preposterous. 

In 1969 all of computing changed. Ken Thompson and Dennis Ritchie who worked at
AT&T Bell Lab Research facility developed the Unix operating system that could
be run on practically any machine. Since Unix was suitable for all computers and
became quickly adopted by universities and companies, it has been called the
universal operating system. It was written in the C programming language which
was invented by Thompson and which is the basis of many popular operating
systems today including Windows and MAC OSX.[^15] 

The popularity of Unix grew immensely in the 1970s and 1980s. The University of
California, Berkeley was an early adopter. In the mid-1970s, a young graduate
student, Bill Joy created his own flavor of Unix and called it Berkeley Software
Distribution or BSD. It should also be noted that Joy is also attributed to
developing the networking protocols TCP/IP which is the underlying basis upon
which data is transferred on the Internet. TCP/IP was first developed and
integrated in BSD and is now the defacto protocol used for networking in all
other operating systems. Bill Joy went on to also develop the vi text editor
(think notepad in Windows), which is still a significant tool used today by
programmers. He is also known for the Java programming language. In 1982, Joy
co-founded Sun Microsystems which offered Unix servers for businesses.  [^16]

Throughout the 1980s and 1990s various flavors of Unix began to appear such as,
Xenix from Microsoft, IBM AIX, FreeBSD, HP/UX, SunOS and UnixWare from Novell,
just to name a few. Steve Jobs used a variant of FreeBSD called Darwin to built
his NeXTstep operating system which became Apples OSX. So if you are using an
Apple computer, congratulations, you are using Unix. [^15]

Unix is the widely used, most influential operating system you have never heard
of. Microsoft Windows, Apples OSX and as you will soon come to understand,
Linux, were all influenced by Unix in one way or another. Either by it's
integration of TCP/IP, actually using a free version of Unix as its core or just
modeling its structure and functionality, all of our current operating systems
have been impacted in some way by Unix.


[^15]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Unix

[^16]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bill_Joy
   
### Free Open Source Software and Linux

It all started with a printer. One particular Xerox 9700 printer in the MIT
Artificial Intelligence Laboratory. The frustration of this printer constantly
jamming came to a head with one particular employee of the MIT Lab, Richard
Stallman. As a programmer, Stallman wanted to program the printer so that all
users waiting for a print job would be alerted if the printer was ever jammed.
This required having the programming source code from the Xerox, which they
flatly refused to provide to Stallman. Richard considered this an outrage and a
moral injustice. MIT had been a culture of sharing and exchanging source code.
He felt not having this free exchange of code as immoral and unfortunately in
the late 1970s and early 1980s closed and proprietary software was beginning to
become the norm. 

Stallman embraced a culture were users had the freedom to share their
programming code with the community and be able to study the code and make
changes to it based upon your need. Unfortunately for him the world was moving
away from this philosophy of sharing code. So in 1983 Stallman established the
GNU project to promote this philosophy.[^17] 

The GNU (GNU is not Unix) project was built upon 4 founding software freedoms:

* The freedom to run the program as you wish, for any purpose (freedom 0). 

* The freedom to study how the program works, and adapt it to your needs
(freedom 1). 

* Access to the source code is a precondition for this.  The freedom to
redistribute copies so you can help your neighbor (freedom 2). 

* The freedom to improve the program, and release your improvements to the
public, so that the whole community benefits (freedom 3). Access to the source
code is a precondition for this.[^18]

These software freedoms were also implemented into a software license called the
General Public License or GPLv2 which programmers who agreed with Stallmans
philosophy could use to license their software. 

One primary goal of GNU was to build an operating system that was similar in
functionality and even compatible to Unix but which honored the GNU philosophy.
Unix was a stable and robust system but was quickly becoming proprietary.  This
led to Stallman to began working on the GNU Hurd operating system, but quickly
realized he would need programs to run on his new operating system. An operating
system without programs was impractical for users. Imagine starting your
computer and logging in. Once logged it you had no word processor program to
type a document, a web browser to navigate the internet or a music player to
listen to music. So in addition to working on GNU Hurd, Stallman developed
programs to run on his new operating system. Some notably the text editor Emacs
a counterpart to vi develop by Bill Joy and a programming code compiler called
GCC so other programmers could also build programs for his new system. 

By 1990, GNU Hurd was struggling and wasn't mature enough to be usable however
there were dozens of applications that were build for this operating system that
wasn't coming to fruition. Stallman's operating system was at a standstill. 

Enter Linus Torvalds, a Finnish student studying computer science at the
University of Helsinki. Torvalds was impressed with Unix and wanted to run it on
his personal computer, however the cost of proprietary Unix was far beyond what
a poor college student could afford. So in 1991, Torvalds wrote his own
operating system modeled after the functionality of Unix and he named it Linux a
combination of his first name Linus and Unix. He used Stallman's GCC compiler to
develop Linux and once he felt is was worthy of sharing, posted his creation on
an Internet newsgroup. To his surprise, it was well received by the programming
community and programmers for around the world began sending Torvalds code to
contribute to this new operating system. 

Linus never imaged his project he was doing "just for fun" would ever be so
popular.  Torvalds began implementing some of the contributed code in his
project and licensed it under Stallman's GNU GPLv2 license. Torvalds now had an
operating system but no applications. Stallman's GNU project had lots of
applications but no working operating system. It was a match made in computer
nerd heaven. Torvalds rolled many of the GNU applications into Linux and a
practical, functioning, free and open source, user ready system was born. [^19] 

Today, Richard Stallman continues to evangelize free (as in freedom) software
and the GNU project as part of his Free Software Foundation (FSF). He has also
extended his public awareness initiatives of the immorality of several other
products and services such as Amazon, Apple, Skype and Netflix to name just a
few. Linus Torvalds works for the Linux Foundation, a non-profit organization
dedicated to promoting Linux which is funded by such companies as Intel, Oracle,
Samsung, Google, Facebook, Hewlett-Packard, Toyota, Adobe, Capital One, Goldman
Sachs, Honda, AT&T and dozens of other companies with a commitment to Linux.
[^20]

[^17]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Richard_Stallman

[^18]:http://www.gnu.org/

[^19]:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/History_of_Linux

[^20]:http://www.linuxfoundation.org/about/members

## Use what works for you

Consider the computer you are currently using and the computers you've chosen to
use in the past. Why did you make the choice you did? What consideration did you
give to the operating system? Modern operating systems are a product of the
people and organizations that brought them forth. Their experiences define their
approach to development and connection with its users and community and the
ultimate outcome of their product. 

Did you even know you had a choice? Each of the operating systems discussed in
the chapter have their strengths and weaknesses. Many user seem to use what they
were first introduced to or what their friends or family members recommend. Most
users once comfortable with an operating system seem to stick with what they
know, even when drastic updates occur that significantly change the user
experience and functionality.


## The impact of Linux how it is being used?

## Did you even consider other options?

##So Many Operating Systems.

Many don't realize they have a choice. The operating system mentioned in this
chapter are all good. They each have their own approach. There is good and bad
with each. I see many unhappy with what they are currently using and they
continue to use it. 

Understand that you have a choice. It boggles my mind that most computer users
believe they only have one choice, and thats Microsoft Windows, unless you are
into design or a hipster then there is Apple OSX. I understand this is due to a
You have a choice. If you have only eaten at McDonalds your whole life, What
experience to you want to have?  lack of knowledge. You have a choice. To
reflect back on restaurant and waitress analogy, 

## Licensing and Philosophy

All operating systems have their strengths and weaknesses. However what sets
Linux apart from waht most desktop user are familiar with is the approach Linux
takes in its development and licensing.

Linux encourages it users to make copies and share with your community. You are
also encouraged to make changes to the software and modify it to your own needs.
It is this philosophy of community sharing and participation which is completely
foreign in an Apple and Microsoft world and is inherently part of the GPLv2
licenses. It is the approach that we can make software better by sharing,
working together as a community and building off each others ideas. This is in
complete opposition to proprietary development that is done behind closed doors
by a small select group of individuals. Linux as well as other open source
projects. 

This open approach to software development allows for software freedom. You are
no longer confined to one or two choices in your operating system which is
designed with a "one size fits all" option. Since the GPLv2 license allows you
to modify and redistribute Linux, you have literally hundreds of options for
your own unique style on needs or you can create your own. (Suse Studio)

## Distributions

Individuals, communities and organizations have created their own version or
"flavor" of Linux called distributions. These distributions are specialized or
customized for specific purposes or follow a specific design. Let's discuss some
of these distributions.

### Red Hat

Red Hat is a multi-billion dollar company and the largest Linux company. They
develop a distribution of Linux called Red Hat Enterprise linux or RHEL designed
fro larger business servers. They charge thousands of dollars for support and
other services. It is most used flavor of Linux in this environment.

Red hat also offers a free testing version of their OS called Fedora, with a
workstation option for desktop and laptop computers. In addition their are
options for cloud computing and servers. Fedora is their testing bed flavor of
Linux, offering "cutting edge" applications on technology which most likely be
implemented into future releases of their stable and solid RHEL version. since
Fedora is cutting edge it maybe a bit rough around the edges, meaning not
everything may work as expected or have a lot of bugs. On the plus side you get
the latest and greatest features and technology. You are sacrificing stability
for the newest and shiniest stuff. Much of what is developed in Fedora is
adopted later by other distribution. Fedora is not recommended for new users. 

### Ubuntu

Ubuntu is one of the most popular Linux distributions for desktop and new users.
Canonical is the company behind Ubuntu which attempt to make Linux easy to use.
Canonical also make a server version of Ubuntu which is growing in popularity
and use.

ubuntu is free to download and use and has an option to pay for support. Ubuntu
has become so popular that other groups customize Ubuntu and use it as a base
for their own flavor of Linux. One of these distributions is Linux mint, which
is based on Ubuntu but adds other tools and customization that has become very
popular for desktop and new users. 

### Security Distributions

Some distributions of Linux are focused on security or penetration testing. Kali
Linux offers tools which test the security of other computers and networks.
these tools are used to try and gain access to systems using password crackers
or network packet sniffing or port scanners. 

TAILS Linux is designed to offer animosity while online which makes it difficult
to track user location or browsing activity. It runs as a liveCD or USB which
means you load an image of TAILS on to a usb drive or burn the image to a CD on
DVD, put if into your system and boot your computer. TAILS never actually
installs on your system. It runs strictly from the CD, DVD or USB and your RAM.
It never touches your hard drive. When your system is rebooted all evidence of
that user's activities is wiped clean. Edward Snowden has been known to use
TAILS Linux to keep his location and activity unknown from the US government.

### Debian and Slackware

Debian and Slackware are two of the oldest surviving Linux distributions, having
been started int eh early to mid 1990's. Either distribution is not normally
recommended for beginners due to the steep learning curve and additional
configuration needed to make a desktop system comfortable for a typical user.
This being said both Debian and Slackware have a reputation for being solid and
stable, making them excellent candidates for servers. It is not that Debian or
Slackware can't be used for the desktop, it is just that most users prefer
additional set up than what comes "out of the box" with these distributions.
This is one reason Ubuntu has become so popular. Ubuntu is built off of Debian
Linux, but which adds some nice easy to use features which enhance the desktop
experience. Linux Mint is another very popular Linux distribution designed for
ease of use and is built off of Debian. In fact, Debian is so solid and well
tested, it has become the most used built upon distribution by other
distributions using it as its core.

Slackware Linux is know for being very "vanilla", meaning it hasn't been fiddled
with much. There has been very little configuration. It is pure in it's approach
and is also known as the "most unix-like" version Linux. It is this pure and
untouched state that attracts Slackware its users. 

### So Many More

There is a Linux distribution for everyone's specific needs. There are
distributions designed for gamers, graphic designers or those who only speak a
rare dialect of Mongolian. Distributions such as Puppy Linux or Tiny Core Linux
are designed to run on older and out-dated machines because they use very little
resources. 

Other speciality Linux distribution run on routers or run Voice over IP (VOIP)
phone systems. Gentoo Linux is designed to install the entire system and all
program from programming source code allowing it to run extremely efficent on
your machine. Peppermint Linux is built toonly use cloud services such Google
Drive, Evernote and other online applications. GParted Linux is a tool to
partition your hard drive while Clonezilla is used to create snapshots and make
backups for your hard drive. There are versions of Linux the run cash registers
or on cell phones.

Whatever your unique case is or just for general computer use, there is a Linux
distribution for you.

## So Which Version of Linux Should I Use?

The most commonly asked question from interested  Linux users is, "Which one
should I use?". If you come form a Microsoft or Apple world you may not be use
to so many choices and this can be overwhelming to those new to exploring Linux.
The answer as to which version of Linux to use is not a straight forward one.
What should happen is you should research a few distributions and try them out
and see which one you like better. However, if you are new to Linux you may not
know what to research or what to look for or you may not understand what you
find. So we'll suggest first trying Ubuntu or Linux Mint to get your feet wet.
If you're happy with what you experience then continue using it. If you become
comfortable with either of those choices then experiment with others. Most Linux
distributions are free, so there is very little risk and you can always return
to Ubuntu or Linux Mint. By testing the waters with these 2 distributions you
get a feel for desktops you like, alternative applications you're use to, the
Linux way of doing things and being introduced to a community. If there is any
aspect of your experience where you're wanted to try something new then explore.
This new found freedom and larger selection of options is quite liberating. 

## But no one uses Linux

Linux has a strong Internet and cloud application presence. This is why Google
uses Linux as the backbone of their search engine, Amazon, Facebook, Twitter,
Instagram and Snapchat also are built off of Linux. Microsoft Windows server has
become popular running internal networks due to its Active Directory tools.
However when it comes to the Internet and public facing applications Linux is
king. Linux runs over 80% of the web pages on the Internet. It is the preferred
operation system in Data Centers and mass storage. Linux is used to generate
animated movies such as Shrek and special effects for Titanic and others.

Android is Linux. The majority of the world's smart phones run Android which is
Linux. If you own an Android phone you are running Linux and probably didn't
even know it. 

Linux is the main operating system found in many cars such as Toyota.

So whether you've known it or not Linux has been a big part of your life. Each
time you've done a Google search, accessed a web page, used Facebook or
Snapchat, used your cell phone or accessed your on-board computer system in your
car you have been using Linux. 

## How Can Linux Help Me 

One huge benefit is that Linux is usually free, which means it and all its tools
professionally. Set up a web server, remote storage, home automation, voice over
IP server or hundreds of other (turn key Linux) applications that can be used
for your own business or personal use or to practice administering a server to
gain experience on application needed by large tech companies, such as Google
Amazon, Facebook and Twitter. 

Build up your resume by joining a community. You can triangulate bugs and submit
but reports, write documentation, offer technical support or help code. Many of
these communities keep public records, documenting names of those who
contributed and exactly what they contributed. To a potential employer proving
your real world experience and skills may prove essential in getting hired.

Sell your support. If you become expert on an application or particular tool,
why not make money on your expertise. 

* Get a job

* Get an edge on the competition

* Use tools large corporations have
 
* Start your own business

\pagebreak

#Chapter 2 

---

## Ways to Try Linux

### Live USB

Now that you know what Linux is and what it does, it might be a good idea to try
Linux. There are several ways to do this. One way is to use a live USB, CD or
DVD. This is a full version of Linux that runs completely from inserted media.
It never touches your hard drive and thus never installs on your computer. You
simply create your live USB, CD or DVD, insert it into your computer and boot up
to a fully functional desktop. Use the live environment to test the Linux
waters. This is a good opportunity to make sure your hardware works with Linux.
Verify sound, wifi, display settings, printer or other significant drivers work
before installing. Linux tends to work with most hardware, but there is the
occasional devise that the hardware manufacturer does not offer a Linux driver.
After using your live environment simply reboot, eject the live media and your
computer will boot up into it's usually operating system.

To create a live USB, CD or DVD you must first download an iso file. An iso file
is an archive file of an optical disk, meaning it is a image file of a CD. You
will then need to burn the iso file to a CD or DVD. You must chose the burn
image option in your CD burning application, which extracts the iso file and
formats the CD in a particular way. Simply copying the iso file to a CD will not
work.

To create a bootable USB drive, you will need to use an application that will
properly extract and format the USB correctly. Rufus and Unetbootin are two
popular options for creating a live USB. Both applications work similarly.
Simply start the program, select the iso file you desire to use, then select the
USB drive you want the data to copied to and click run or start. You are now
able to boot you live environment.

### Virtual Machines

Another option for trying Linux is to use virtualization software to create a
virtual machine. Both Oracle and Vmware offer solutions for creating and running
virtual machines. 

Virtual machines allow a user to run two or more operating systems at the same
time. For example you can run Windows as your host or main operating system.
Then in another window run Linux as if were another application. There are
several tutorials Online which walk you through the process of setting up a
virtual machine and guest operating system. The general process for doing this
is to download and install the virtual machine software such as Oracle
Virtualbox or Vmware. Once installed create a virtual machine by naming your
machine, selecting the maximum file size you will allot for your virtual machine
and amount of RAM you are willing to share with your host system. Download an
iso file and configure the newly created virtual machine to sue the iso as the
virtual CD. Then start the virtual machine. You are now running an operating
system within an operating system.

### The Cloud or Remote System

You may also run and access Linux remotely. Amazon's web services or MicroSoft's
Azure service allow you to create an instance of Linux that you can connect to
remotely using any computer from anywhere as long as you have an Internet
connection. Each of these services are well documented and provide in-depth
instructions to get up and running. Usually you can have an instance of Linux
running in just a few minutes.

Koding.io offers a great free product that gives a user full access to a Ubuntu
Linux machine. Several web development tools and web server is included with
this service.

Finally, since most web hosting services use Linux, signing up with a hosting
company is a great way to interact with Linux. Many of these services are free
or for a minimal cost. 

In order to access any of these services, remote access software is required.
Putty is a popular program to access these machines on a Windows computers.
Otherwise, a command line program can be used called secure shell protocol or
SSH which will be discussed later in this book.

### Dual Boot

Dual booting is installing 2 operating system on a hard drive. In order to do
this, your hard drive will need to partitioned or divided or sliced into
different segments. This can usually be defined and done as part of the Linux
installation process, through partitioning software or tools built into Windows.
Once the hard drive is partitioned, install Linux on the portion of the hard
drive you designate. When installation is complete, each time the machine is
restarted the user will be presented with a menu allowing the user to chose
which operating system to boot. To change operating systems, the machine will
need to be rebooted, however files can be shared between partitions so if booted
into Linux, you have access to files in Windows. For Windows to access a Linux
partition special drivers need to be installed.

### Dedicated Machine

One of the best and easiest ways to experience Linux is to install it as the
main operating system on a computer, laptop or server. A spare machine can be
brought back to life with Linux. Although, Linux runs great on high end new
computers it also runs well or computers a few years old. Some of these
computers can be purchased from local classifieds fairly cheaply if you don't
have a computer just lying around not doing anything. Thrift stores or used
computer stores are also great resources for finding an inexpensive machine. 

## Installing Linux

The install process can vary depending on the distribution chosen however there
are common procedures throughout the various installers. In an effort not to
give an in-depth description of the various Linux distributions, we will discuss
the common aspects experienced during a typical install. Although these common
concepts are the same the interface will also vary even though the end result
will be the same. 

Many installers tend to gather basic information about your region or
localization. So selecting a time zone, language and keyboard layout is fairly
typical. Partitioning is a big part of the installation as well. Many times the
user is presented with the option to have the installer auto configure your
partitions or to manually configure. It is important to read the information
presented by the installer of documentation provided by the distribution
website. A little research can be extremely helpful. What you choose depends on
what you are trying to achieve. If you have a dedicated computer for Linux
choose the option to install Linux on the full hard drive. If you are wanting to
dual boot Linux with another operating system such as Windows will require a bit
more attention to detail, otherwise you may overwrite the Windows partition.
Most installers offer to shrink the partition of the currently installed
operating system in an effort to free space for Linux. If a hard drive was
previously partitioned, identify the free space allocated for Linux and choose
this space as the install destination.

The first time partitioning can be a little unnerving, particularly if you are
attempting to dual boot and worry about wiping out your installation of Windows.
The more "friendly" installer usually have graphical user interfaces (GUI)
partitioning tools, which makes partitioning very straight forward.

If you are dual booting make sure Windows is installed first. Windows always
assumes it is the only operating system and will overwrite any existing
operating system.

If dual booting if is always a good idea to back up your Windows installation in
case something goes wrong, which is rare but nevertheless a good practice. 

When choosing a destination point for your installation you maybe presented with
the option of creating logical volumes and/or encrypting your hard drive.
Logical Volume Management (LVM) is a tool to easily manage resizing logical hard
drive volumes even over multiple physical volumes. For example, two physical
hard drives can logically be viewed as a single volume.

If you choose to encrypt your hard drive an additional password will be
requested which will act as the key to accessing the encrypted data.

User and password set up is another aspect of a Linux install. Some distribution
offer a traditional set up with an administrator or root account and a regular
user account. Doing this is fairly intuitive. In recent years several
distributions will give the option to make a normal user an administrator as
well. Usually this is a checkbox option when setting up the user. 

Most distributions offer in depth instructions regarding installation as well as
several blogs and tutorial websites. Some installations have the user boot into
a live desktop environment and then begin the installation by clicking on a icon
n the desktop. Other distributions begin installation as soon as the USB or CD
is booted. Ubuntu, Linux Mint and Fedora are examples of distribution that have
simple, straight forward installers, while Slackware and Arch Linux have more
involved and technical installers.

## What Does Linux Look Like (GUI)

Some who are unfamiliar with Linux may assume that Linux is antiquated or
complex because it uses an interface some associate with the DOS Operating
System. Although Linux does have a powerful command line interface which most of
the this book will focus on, it also has a rich Graphical User interface (GUI).
However, unlike operating systems you may be familiar with such as Windows or
Apple OSX, a user has a choice in which graphical interface they want to use. 

Most users should feel very comfortable in these environments. Each has an
application menu of some kind to navigate installed programs. Most support
either a tool bar or desktop icons that offer quick access to use frequently
used programs, There is usually setting features which allow the user to change
the look and feel of your interface, change colors, themes and background.
Settings are also used to manage wifi, printing and other typical user impacted
configurations. Clicking on an icon to start Firefox works the same in Linux,
OSX and Windows, only the layout and feel of the environment is different.

There are dozens of these interface for Linux and since they all work similarly,
we'll discuss just a few of the most popular.  

### KDE

K Desktop Environment has been around a long time and is known for being highly
configurable. At times its been criticized fro having too many options. In its
default state, KDE has a toolbar at the bottom of the screen which contains an
application menu, a toolbar to manage currently running programs, status icons
for volume, wifi, battery level and time. It has a very familiar layout and feel
to most version of Windows.

Krunner is a nifty tool built into KDE that provides an all in one query tool.
It is initialized by pressing Alt+F2 which opens a search bar at the top of the
screen. The search bar allows you to search for and launch applications,
documents and websites. It is even capable of solving math equation. 

### Gnome

